Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today is the start
of yet another three-part mini-series,
this time on the loose theme of “power
struggles in post-colonial Africa”.
In part one, today’s episode, we are going
to learn about Mobutu Sese Seko, the man
who ruled the Democratic Republic of Congo
with an iron fist and a leopard-skin hat.
In part two, we are going to learn
about the curious case of the man
who went to Eton, the most exclusive
private school in Britain, studying
alongside princes and plutocrats, but
was arrested on the charge of attempting
a military coup in Equatorial Guinea.
And in part three, we are going to zoom
in on Angola to understand how Chinese
power and money have changed the rules
of the game in post-colonial Africa.
Ok then, let’s get right into it
and talk about Mobutu Sese Seko.
There was a 1990 New York Times bestseller
called A Natural History of the Senses,
where the author went into detail about
the reasons that tastes change over time.
Why do children tend to dislike
certain flavours but start to
enjoy them as young adults?
Why are our preferences at 45
often different from those at 25?
In the case of today’s protagonist, at
the age of 25, his favourite drink–and
his only contribution to his wedding
banquet–was a single crate of beer,
but at 45, his tastes had evolved.
Any guest at one of his parties
would be greeted with a flute of
Pink Laurent Perrier champagne.
Now, this is probably not best explained
by any scientific theory, but rather
by the fact that at 25, he was a lowly
army officer, and at 45, he was the
undisputed leader of sub-Saharan Africa’s
largest country, and by some estimates,
one of the wealthiest men in the world.
This is the story of Joseph-Désiré
Mobutu, or Mobutu Sese Seko,
as he would later be called.
He was born in 1930, in Lisala, a small
town in what was then the Belgian Congo.
His mother was a hotel maid, and his
father a cook working for a Belgian judge.
His father died when he was only 8 years
old, and his uncle and grandfather stepped
up as sort of joint father figures.
It wasn’t a privileged upbringing by
any means, but the young boy was clever,
confident, and somewhat rebellious.
He was known for all sorts of
pranks, tricks on his Catholic
school teachers, and with age, these
turned from classroom jokes into
more serious acts of disobedience.
He even ran away from school on a boat,
reportedly to go and meet a girl, and
was found downriver several weeks later.
As a punishment for his misbehaviour, he
was kicked out of school and forced to
join the Force Publique, the colonial army
run by the Belgians, where he served for
a few years before becoming a journalist.
Now, before we move on, it’s worth
just reminding ourselves a little
bit about the history of Congo at
the time Mobutu was a young man.
It was a Belgian colony, and of all
the colonial regimes in Africa, it
's hard to find one more extractive,
oppressive and brutal than the
Belgians’ colonisation of the Congo.
You might know this already, perhaps
you might remember some of this from
Episode 289 on King Leopold II, but
if you don’t, here’s a brief reminder.
The country was treated as a vast
resource mine—rubber, copper,
uranium, diamonds—all extracted for
Belgian profit, with practically zero
consideration for the livelihood or
well-being of any of the native people.
The colonial administrators
were fiendishly cruel, and the
local population was kept in a
state of dependency and fear.
It was seriously grim, and an estimated
10 million Congolese people were killed
directly and indirectly in the first
23 years of Belgian colonisation alone.
And, as per most countries that
were colonised, but even more so in
the case of Congo, there had been
practically no investment in local
infrastructure, training of local people,
or creation of laws or institutions.
This meant that when independence came,
as it inevitably did in 1960, Congo was
desperately unprepared to govern itself.
There was no political infrastructure,
no experienced civil service, no
established judiciary, and no military
leadership beyond the Belgian officers
who had run the Force Publique.
Unlike British or French colonies,
which had at least had some form
of elite education system for local
people, Belgium had deliberately avoided
training a Congolese professional class.
Indeed, at the time of independence
in 1960, there were just 30 Congolese
university graduates in the entire
country, a country of around
15 million people at the time.
So, back to Mobutu.
At the time of Congolese independence,
he had been working as a journalist for
a few years, and had become friendly
with a man named Patrice Lumumba.
Lumumba was a fiery orator and
committed nationalist who won the
country’s first democratic election.
As his secretary, he chose Mobutu.
But if you are thinking of “secretary”
as an administrative helper who brought
coffee and tea, and greeted guests
at the reception, no, Mobutu was a
very different kind of secretary.
He was charismatic, spoke several
languages, fiercely intelligent, and
was effectively Lumumba’s trusted
right hand man and confidant.
Or as one US ambassador’s private
notes put it, “this was an extremely
intelligent man, very young, perhaps
immature, but a man with great potential”.
Lumumba had clearly seen this potential,
too, and promoted Mobutu to colonel and
soon after, Chief of Staff of the national
army - a meteoric rise that gave him
enormous influence over the country’s
only cohesive institution at the time.
But for Lumumba it
would backfire terribly.
Shortly after the declaration of
independence, on the 30th of June 1960,
the country had fallen into disarray.
Lumumba was technically the
Prime Minister, but his hold on
the country was shaky at best.
Force Publique soldiers mutinied,
and when it looked like the United
Nations peacekeepers sent in to help
wouldn’t be able to contain them,
the Prime Minister, Lumumba, turned
to the Soviet Union for assistance.
The Soviets sent technical
advisors and support, which helped
quell the unrest, but created
an altogether different problem.
This was 1960, the peak of the Cold
War, and the United States got very
nervous at the idea of Soviet influence
in the newly independent Congo.
With the backing of Belgian and, most
likely, also U.S. intelligence, Mobutu
orchestrated a coup-like intervention
that removed Lumumba from power.
Lumumba fled, was arrested by troops
loyal to Mobutu, but instead of being
tried or protected, he was flown to
a breakaway province hostile to his
leadership and handed over to his enemies.
There, the country’s first
democratically elected leader was
brutally tortured and executed,
with Belgian officers watching on.
His death shocked the world and
remains one of the darkest stains on
Congo’s post-independence history.
Now, importantly, this first
“coup”, as it's been called,
was relatively bloodless.
It wasn’t good news if you were Patrice
Lumumba, but it seemed like Mobutu
was a loyal army officer who only
had the best in mind for his country.
He claimed it was a “neutralisation”
of all political figures, Lumumba
included, and declared that Congo
would be governed by technocrats
for the following six months.
What actually happened, though, was
less a smooth technocratic transition
and more a chaotic power vacuum.
The so-called “neutral government” that
Mobutu installed quickly lost legitimacy.
Regional leaders and army officers
began acting independently.
The country effectively fractured.
In the mineral-rich south, backed
by Belgian mining interests, one
province declared independence.
In the east, another city became a
stronghold for Lumumba’s supporters.
There were foreign troops from the
United Nations, Belgian commandos,
and even Cuban advisors in the mix.
The entire country was being pulled apart
by competing forces, and Mobutu, far
from being a neutral arbiter, was quietly
consolidating power in the background.
Over the next few years, he positioned
himself as the one figure who
could hold the country together.
And to a population exhausted by years
of instability and civil war, the idea
of a strongman didn’t sound so bad.
So, in 1965, at the age of
35, Mobutu saw his chance.
He used a request from the President
to “temporarily restore order” as a
springboard to launch a military coup.
He seized control of the country,
and in a landmark speech, declared
that Congo had been so damaged by
politicians and bad actors in the
five years since independence that
it would take at least another five
years to get things back on track.
So he dissolved parliament, banned all
political parties, and declared that
for the next five years, there would
only be one voice in the Congo: his.
This was 1965, and for the next 32
years, he would rule the country
through a mixture of carrot,
stick, and cult of personality.
And so began the process of
rebranding not just Mobutu the
man, but the nation itself.
In 1971, he renamed the country
Zaire, saying the name “Congo”
was a relic of colonialism.
He also renamed himself, dropping
“Joseph-Désiré” and adopting a far
more theatrical title: Mobutu Sese Seko
Kuku Ngbendu wa Za Banga, which roughly
translates as “the all-powerful warrior
who, because of his endurance and
inflexible will to win, goes from conquest
to conquest, leaving fire in his wake.”
Quite something.
And he didn’t stop there.
Streets, cities, rivers, and even clothing
were swept up in this new cultural vision.
Western names were
replaced with African ones.
Suits and ties were banned from
government offices and replaced
with a collarless shirt known as the
“abacost”, which is short for à bas
le costume, or “down with the suit”.
Foreign music was pushed aside
in favour of homegrown styles.
The whole campaign was called the
Authenticité movement, meaning
“authenticity” in English.
Now, this movement was initially
very popular in the Congo,
or Zaire as it was then.
And it was also praised by
some foreign commentators.
After all, Mobutu was pushing for
a kind of cultural decolonisation,
encouraging pride in African identity
after decades of European rule.
But others were more sceptical.
They said it was less about
pride and more about power.
Authenticité didn’t just strip the country
of European names; it gave Mobutu the
excuse to eliminate anyone who wasn’t
“authentically Zairian,” or who disagreed
with his vision of what that meant.
He was now not just the president,
but something closer to a monarch.
He installed giant portraits
of himself in public squares.
His face appeared on banknotes,
stamps, and schoolbooks.
He referred to himself as “the father
of the nation,” “the guide,” and “the
messiah.” At official events, his
name would often be introduced with a
list of over a dozen honorific titles.
And of course, there was
the leopard-skin hat.
Always present, always
perfectly positioned.
It became a symbol of his rule;
part theatre, part menace.
Alongside it came his carved ebony
walking stick, his dark glasses, and
his meticulously tailored abacost.
This was a man who took image
seriously, a man who understood
the power of performance.
But behind the smiling portraits
and grandiose titles was a
deeply repressive regime.
Dissidents were routinely tortured
or disappeared, opposition parties
were outlawed, and intelligence
agencies kept the population
under constant surveillance.
Public executions were
staged to send a message.
Mobutu’s grip on power wasn’t just
psychological; it was brutally enforced.
And during all of this, the country
was in a serious state of decay.
Mobutu ruled through a complex
web of patronage, of dispersing
power, favours and money to
his family, friends and allies.
If you were loyal, you were rewarded.
If you weren’t, you were either
exiled, imprisoned, or worse.
Corruption wasn’t just tolerated,
it was built into the system.
In one speech, he said, “If you want
to steal, steal a little in a nice way.
Only if you steal so much as to become
rich overnight, you will be caught.”
Perhaps he should have clarified
that there was one man for whom
this rule didn’t apply: him.
Estimates vary, but Mobutu is believed
to have embezzled somewhere between $4
and $15 billion during his time in power.
Indeed, in 1970, he is estimated
to have stolen 60% of the
entire country’s annual budget.
And this wasn’t all stashed away in
Swiss bank accounts; there were lavish
displays of wealth and opulence.
He built a huge palace in his ancestral
home in northern Congo, which was
dubbed “The Versailles of the Jungle”.
He had more homes in France,
Portugal, and Switzerland.
He travelled with a refrigerated
case of pink champagne, and
there are reports of suits being
sent to Paris for dry cleaning.
In the 1980s, he even reportedly
had a Concorde jet pick him up
for shopping trips in Europe.
Meanwhile, back in Zaire, as it was
then, schools crumbled, hospitals
lacked medicine, teachers and civil
servants often went unpaid for months.
The economy became increasingly
dependent on foreign aid and loans.
And when there was a crash in
the price of copper, which was
one of Zaire’s main exports, the
country literally ran out of money.
Inflation soared, debt piled
up, and the state became little
more than an empty shell.
Yet, Mobutu remained in power.
Partly because he was a
master manipulator, but
also because of geopolitics.
Throughout the Cold War, the West had seen
him as a reliable anti-communist ally.
He hosted CIA operations, supported
US-backed rebels in Angola, and regularly
reminded Washington that if they didn’t
support him, the Soviets might take over.
The irony, of course, was that Mobutu
wasn’t exactly consistent in his ideology.
He had been outspoken in his admiration
for Mao Zedong, and had flirted with
ideas from the Chinese Revolution.
He condemned European decadence
all while sipping French champagne
and collecting fine European art.
He presented himself as the symbol
of African pride, while secretly
collaborating with Belgian intelligence
to remove Lumumba, one of the
continent’s great anti-colonial leaders.
It was hard to see what he
stood for, apart from his
personal enrichment, that was.
And by the early 1990s,
things were falling apart.
The Cold War was over, and as there was
no threat of the Soviet Union trying
to push communist ideology in Africa,
the West no longer needed Mobutu.
The Aid dried up.
Western diplomats, who had once been
his staunch allies, now publicly
called for democratic reform.
And inside the country,
people were fed up.
Civil servants hadn’t been paid in months.
University students were protesting.
The army was unpaid and
increasingly mutinous.
Strikes, demonstrations,
and riots became common.
The myth of Mobutu’s invincibility
began to crumble, and with it,
the carefully constructed image
of the “father of the nation.”
Pro-democracy movements
were sweeping the continent.
Mobutu, who was now ageing and
increasingly unwell, was forced
to start promising reforms.
He said there would be free elections.
But they never came.
In 1996, a rebellion sprung
up across the country.
Their armies swept through
eastern Zaire with lightning
speed, facing little resistance.
Mobutu’s once-feared
army barely fought back.
Many soldiers simply deserted,
while others joined the rebellion.
In a matter of months, the rebels had
captured vast swathes of the country.
Their leader, a man named Laurent-Désiré
Kabila, promised an end to dictatorship,
and as his forces advanced westward,
city after city fell without a fight.
Mobutu’s control evaporated
almost overnight.
So, he fled.
First to his palace in the north
of the country, the so-called
Versailles of the Jungle.
But even there, he was not safe.
He attempted to negotiate a peace
deal, but no one was interested.
The world had moved on.
What’s more, he was a very sick man,
and had been battling prostate cancer.
He tried to negotiate with France for
medical treatment, but they refused.
No one wanted to be seen
propping him up anymore.
He boarded a plane and flew to Togo,
then to Morocco, where he had property.
He arrived in Rabat as a disgraced
former leader, his entourage vastly
reduced, his fortune frozen or looted.
He died just a few months later,
in September 1997, aged 66.
There was no state funeral,
no national mourning.
Just a quiet death in a foreign
land, a dramatic fall for a
man who had once styled himself
as the embodiment of a nation.
And yet, his legacy lives on.
Not in statues or street names–most of
those were removed a long time ago–but in
the structure of the state he left behind.
A system of patronage, of
centralised power, of wealth
concentrated in the hands of a few.
The Democratic Republic of Congo is one
of the wealthiest countries in the world
in terms of its natural resources, with
huge deposits of copper, cobalt, gold,
diamonds, and other precious metals.
It has a population of more
than 100 million people, yet
75% of them live in poverty.
In 1960, when Mobutu first took
power, it was one of the most
industrialised countries in Africa,
second only to South Africa.
It is now one of the poorest.
Clearly, there are many more reasons
for this than Mobutu Sese Seko.
He was a man of his time.
A product of colonialism, Cold War
politics, and personal ambition.
But his story is also a warning, of
what happens when power is unchecked,
when image replaces substance, and
when a country is ruled not for its
people, but for the enrichment of
a single man in a leopard-skin hat.
OK then, that is it for today's episode
on Mobutu Sese Seko, or to give him his
full title, “the all-powerful warrior who,
because of his endurance and inflexible
will to win, goes from conquest to
conquest, leaving fire in his wake.”
As a quick reminder, this is part
one of a three-part mini-series
on the loose theme of power
struggles in post-colonial Africa.
Next up, in part two, will be an
episode on Simon Mann, the ex-Etonian
who tried to hatch a plot to
launch a coup in Equatorial Guinea.
And in part three, we will be
talking about the Angolan Model,
and the new economic model China
is pioneering on the continent.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.